hi everyone welcome back to the exciting
conclusion of the life of Sir Edmund
Trelawny Backhouse 2nd baronet I thought
we'd finish his life in two parts but
this one went into double overtime in
October 1932 Backhouse and bland resumed
their correspondence after a long period
of silence caused in part by Morrison's
obsession to hold in control back house
all to himself and to destroy the
relationship with back house and land
that they collaborated on those two
books was a real insult to Morris and so
Backhouse and bland hadn't talked for
years but now back house and bland were
again corresponding Backhouse mentioned
a bland that these days he quote had
gone native by wearing Chinese dress as
is my habit now I am able to go about
with delightful freedom and in company
with Chinese friends to pass as an
indogene unquote Backhouse had gone
native in 1921 and showed up in London
wearing traditional chinese dress and a
flowing white beard he was quite a sight
to behold the main thing that back house
was interested talked to bland about was
the matter of Lillian King's diary I
mentioned him in part 1 lead yin yang is
the most famous eunuch of all time and
perhaps was the richest he was part of
sushis team serving her as grand eunuch
and along with wrong lu one of the most
powerful and influential men in china
when people ask how did she stay in
power for so long it was with the help
of people she trusted like this guy in
back house in Bland's sushi book lelia
Inge was the worst of the villains at
the Manchu court and ever since nineteen
fifteen Backhouse had mentioned and
roundabout ways that through a relative
of the grand eunuch he had access to the
diary of lili and yang this was too good
to be true but the thought was quite
intriguing too bland to have found the
diary of a mid-range court official like
jingshan was astounding in itself but
the diary of lili onion this was too
good to be true to ass analogous like
bland he knew what the veil
you and B to the understanding of Ching
dynasty history especially during the
period from 1861 to 1908 Bland's new
back house was a total rascal but
despite all the bitterness of the past
bland was interested to collaborate with
Backhouse one last time on this Lillian
yang diary well Blanche should have
known better if there ever was a lil en
Ying diary Backhouse sure didn't have it
back house kept jerking Bland's chain
and every time bland asked to see some
excerpts Backhouse would exhibit the
usual bizarre behavior and get the same
well-worn excuses they were both feeling
vindicated from Dutch sinologist jjl
diamond X paper that declared the Jing
Shawn diary authentic despite the great
victory of diving ducks declaration that
the jingshan diary was not the forgery
others purported it was attack still
continued but bland fought anyone who
challenged the authenticity that he had
practically built his reputation on then
1936 rolled around and Bland's luck ran
out there was this British journalist
named William lewisohn he was a China
scholar and edited a newspaper in
Shanghai why he saw certain things that
all the experts didn't it's hard to say
he pointed out a number of things out
too bland into diven deck who of course
exploded and replied most forcefully to
lewisohn threatening with legal action
and threats bland was probably thinking
when is this ever going to end about
this jean jean diary as hugh
trevor-roper said quote but lewisohn was
not to be deterred he went ahead and
published his findings in the form of an
article in the learning press in this
article he showed by careful internal
analysis that the diary could not have
been written as a diary that it could
not be the genuine work of one man and
that it could not have been written by
jingzhong he showed that it was to some
extent a pastiche for it incorporated
verbatim passages from the contemporary
published account
by the grand secretary Wang LAN Xiao
Lewison had deconstructed the diary one
piece at a time and then printed his
findings and sent copies to bland and
back house for comment bland panicked at
once he had dodged every bullet up till
now but this one was practically a
smoking gun there was only one person
left who could defend against these
attacks that was Edmund Beck house it
had been more than a quarter century
since Morrison first cast doubt about
the authenticity of this jingshan diary
despite a regular barrage of missiles
bland ship never sank now he was sinking
and only Backhouse could possibly save
the day Backhouse gave the same story he
always gave about finding the diary
three days after jingshan was killed how
he translated it everything was real as
it was he denied all the allegations
there wasn't much help the specific
issues were not addressed it was worse
than not answering at all the difference
between now in 1936 and way back when
that she book first came out was that
everyone knew about back house and his
dealings with the bodley and brown and
company Pauling and company the American
banknote company and everyone else who
got burned along the way way back when
Backhouse was able to hide behind his
aristocratic upbringing his scholarship
and apparent respectability now all
these years later his reputation always
preceded him all the stories were well
known so when lewisohn announced his
findings taken into context of what
everyone knew about back house after all
these years this make total sense this
diary used as the primary source to
write the two books was indeed
fabricated by Backhouse so 1936 was a
terrible year and after years of
sustaining damage the diary of jingshan
discovered on August eighteen nineteen
hundred was finally sunk by a single
torpedo so bland got walloped with a
left and right hook first by getting
mislead and having his time wasted over
the Lillian Inc diary and
now after a quarter century bland faced
the bitter truth that back house had
used his incredible scholarship to
fabricate this diary cleverly hide it
for all these years and then pass it off
as true not only had bland defended
himself all these years but he
aggressively attacked some detractors
imagine how he felt now dive in dec two
he had declared the diary authentic and
fought hand in hand with bland when
other sinologist challenged the
authenticity he too after trying in vain
to at least put a fig leaf on his
reputation had to say in 1937 he was
wrong everyone had clung to the hope
that all these unpublished fragments of
the diary that back house all these
years claim to have would be produced
for all to see if there was maybe
possibly one single thing that might
salvage this entire debacle it would
have been the documents Backhouse said
he had found but when he said oops they
all got burned in a fire everyone at
this point just threw up their hands and
said yeah someone visited Backhouse
around this time and had this to say
quote Sir Edmund received me in the
garden which he occupied in the western
city of Peking he was a man of great
charm tall and spare bared it like
tolstoy whom in his youth as he told me
he had visited in yazd nia polyanna in
his hand he held a glass of whisky which
his doctor had prescribed to raise his
blood pressure as to the boring old
question of the diary he had nothing to
add to the narrative which he had
already sent Backhouse said quote the
facts are as I have stated the document
was found as I have written the whole of
my narrative is a cold hard statement of
fact unquote well scholars of today
pretty much all say this Diaries a
forgery but man the books produced from
the diary are great reading so go track
them down google books has them both
free China under the Empress Dowager
being the history of the life of sushi
compiled from the state papers and the
private diary of the Comptroller of her
household jo p bland and II Backhouse
case closed Morrison
in peace was right all along so in 1937
as the Japanese started their invasion
following the Marco Polo Bridge incident
on 77 Backhouse was 64 years old he
seemed to always live in a state of
terror abused and taken advantage of by
his servants chang pao-chai the one in
particular that lord it over back house
was murdered by another servant who took
his place he was not in particularly
good health Backhouse if he went out at
all never mixed with Europeans people
rarely saw him and if he was seen it was
sort of something you'd tell somebody
ever since 19 21 when he showed up in
England looking like matteo ricci and
chinese dress he had completely adopted
a Chinese lifestyle including with his
appearance after so many years he was a
well-known Beijing character Backhouse
always lived outside the legation
quarter first in the Tartar city and
then in april nineteen thirty-seven just
before the Marco Polo Bridge incident he
moved to the western city enjoying what
couldn't a bit of bad existence in a
beautiful garden house like I mentioned
before he didn't mix with Westerners and
avoided Western officials like the
plague but on those occasions where he
couldn't avoid someone if someone set a
low to him he'd transition instantly
into the most genteel charming and
polite Victorian gentleman you ever saw
people were just drawn to him in August
1939 the sino-japanese war was raging in
all the cities foreigners fled to the
turnstiles and back house was advised
get out he decided to stay in Beijing
and tough it out when the battle reached
his street he casually walked away from
his residence and afterward it was
burned down in the fighting Backhouse
hadn't tried to save anything in all his
papers his library all his possessions
were gone Backhouse ended up shacking up
at the Austrian legation which
trevor-roper described as quote a
convenient hostel for miscellaneous
fugitives unquote backhouses publisher
ran into him around this time when was
quoted saying quote Backhouse I saw the
other day in the compound of the ex
Austrian legation
where he has moved to fleeing from his
house in the West City as his servants
turned anti-british so he says he seems
to be in good health unquote Backhouse
stayed at the Austrian legation for a
couple years until December 1941 when
World War two reached a new phase now
for sure all British had to escape or
else face becoming an enemy alien all
this time back house had been receiving
his allowance from his family but that
no longer became possible so he was more
hard up than ever but an old guy like
Backhouse wasn't particularly important
to the Japanese and for the most part he
was left alone he moved on to a room at
the British Legation compound the
following year Backhouse who came from a
long line of Quakers embraced the
Catholic faith and it was right around
this time that back house matched his
final collaborator Reinhard her Polly we
discussed him at the opening of Part 1
for the last couple years of backhouses
life he sorta took on the mantle of
backhouses caregiver so to speak purple
he was a doctor so he was able to
monitor backhouses health and you know
do the kind of things a physician does
but he was also a companion who stayed
with Backhouse during these very violent
times there's an old story about how in
her Polly first saw Backhouse passing by
in his rickshaw he asked his driver who
was that european guy who just passed
and the driver whispered to him that
this man was once the Empress Dowager
secret lover and supposedly from this
story her bleep now the Swiss honorary
consul in Beijing coached the whole
story out of Backhouse that he had held
inside for all these years her plea was
actually ecstatic he wrote about his
chance meeting with back house and that
now he was quote in contact with Sir
Edmund who having moved for many years
in a vanished world brilliant in art and
literature and had an extraordinary
oriental court could in his conversation
bring all back so colorful and vivid
that the historical persons whom he had
once met seemed alive and spoke through
him unquote all these amazing stories
back house
her plea insisted he must write them all
down and preserve them for posterity and
so after a little financial enticement
Backhouse agreed in the hospital to
write his memoirs and her plea became
his editor and collaborator and sure
enough in may of nineteen forty-three
the first volume of the memoirs of
Edmund Backhouse were ready a hundred
and fifty thousand words and this was
decadence monshou this was the famous
obscene memoir of his days mixing with
the manchu court and of his torrid and
salacious sexual relationship with the
Empress Dowager sushi from 1902 to 1908
by now Backhouse had moved into his
final residence a private room at st.
michelle's hospital located inside the
legation quarter a French Catholic
institution run by nuns and administered
by the French Embassy there in that
hospital he ran into the French consul
general from Shanghai visiting Beijing
for some matter Monsieur roll aunty
Marjorie de Margerie had long known of
Backhouse from reading his book so he
was delighted to meet such a character
as this he wrote to the meeting
Backhouse quote I found him very frail
but well cared for he greeted me warmly
on account of my own early days in
Peking and also but less warmly because
I had known his brothers the
distinguished Admirals in England he was
an impressive figure with a long white
beard very much a man of letters and he
showed real pleasure as he told me about
his literary friendships when young in
Paris with wild fair land and malhomme
need I tell you that I was fascinated
especially when by questioning him I
obtained a promise of further
installments he then told me that he had
even known Rambo at time of his liaison
with their land and gave me details on
that subject unpublished eyewitness
testimony on Rambo and vert Lang found
in Peking that was something to turn the
head of any lover of poetry in
particular he was obsessed with
homosexuality and recounted his own
experiences with relish the assurance
with which he spoke in the extreme
dignity of his appearance
were in perfect contrast with his known
morals of what she boasted freely I
revisited him several times but he
became visibly weaker his memoir
decadence monshou was followed by a
second memoir entitled the dead past
this one concerned his early life before
he moved to China in 1898 like the China
memoir it's chock-full of sex and other
matters that her plea knew the world of
the 1940s was not ready for in this
second memoir Backhouse ranted
relentlessly on all those from his early
days who he despised quite a bit of
venom in the words contained in this
work sir edmund Backhouse died in his
bed on January eighth nineteen forty
four he was 70 he was buried in the
Catholic cemetery of jalan not too far
from the grave of Matteo Ricci Adam
solve on bail and Ferdinand Derby's to a
all featured in CHP episode 98
backhouses will was dated februari 11
1943 everything he had he left to his
servants and to his relatives back in
England when he died he had in his
possession some worn clothes an old
Victorian travelling clock in a few
books in his well Backhouse wrote of his
good friend who cared for him in his
last year's quote to reinhard her Polly
Council of Switzerland my deepest
gratitude for the unfailing kindness
patronage goodwill which he had so
freely accorded and which is beyond my
power adequately to acknowledge unquote
so Backhouse died and her plea put these
two memoirs away for another day he was
probably correct and thinking 1944 was
not the right time to publish something
like this so her plea put it in a safe
place until 1973 when just before he
died in his attempt to preserve the
history he contacted hugh trevor-roper
to examine the original and annotated
manuscripts that her Polly had kept
locked away for almost 30 years hugh
trevor-roper said of these memoirs quote
i was able to satisfy myself that the
Mars were not merely erroneous hair and
they're not merely colored by
imagination in detail but pure fantasy
throughout and yet fantasy that was spun
with extraordinary ingenuity around and
in between true facts that accurately
remembered or cunningly bent to sustain
it unquote he further called the two
memoirs a quote pornographic novelette a
last explosion of repressed and
distorted sexuality by the way I read
trevor-roper was a well-known homophobe
so this might explain why he was so
disgusted with the gay side of back
house in decadence monshou Backhouse
told the story of his torrid
relationship with the Empress Dowager
ever since august of 1904 when the grand
eunuch li li and yang called on him and
told him sushi requested his presence at
the palace and for the rest of the book
it's a non-stop sexual romp around the
forbidden city with Backhouse recalling
all his homosexual relations with all
the eunuchs there and his needing to
rise to the occasion to satisfy sue
she's off to requested command
performances not all decadence man shoe
is porn plenty of other stuff in there
to titillate you for example Backhouse
recounted the deaths of the guangxu
emperor and sushi like you've never
heard them before in 2008 tests were
done that determined the guanxi Emperor
died of arsenic poisoning so the way
back house described it it just couldn't
be true Backhouse also recounts in the
memoir how he came into possession of
lili onions diary upon the death of
sushi Lili Anning was certain that you
and shirk I now the most powerful man in
China handed out for him was going to
have him executed so Lili and Yin Yin is
after to preserve his name for posterity
handed his Diaries over the back house
with the instructions to hold off for a
decade before revealing them to the
world Backhouse assured the grand eunuch
he would do so but there were never any
leading Diaries and no one ever saw them
future ever Roper summed up Backhouse
this way back house was quote the
spendthrift a state of the
1890's who became a sinologist and
Rekluse of the next century the
spiritual fascist of the Second World
War the brilliant linguist who used his
gifts to diddle successive patrons the
enchanter who spells softened the hard
heads of businessman and diplomats the
collector whose generosity enriched his
old University and who inexplicably
abandoned his old papers to meaningless
destruction the secret wartime agent who
led his own government on a ludicrous
wild-goose chase the scholar who created
a masterpiece of historical writing and
produced a masterpiece of forgery the
ghost writer who created a whole world
of ghosts the mystery man the
calligrapher the pornographer however he
may be judged he was in his self
expression and original unquote when
earnshaw books published decadence
monshou in 2011 hugh trevor-roper had
already been dead for eight years he had
established his name and reputation in
his 1947 work the last days of Hitler
his career sorta went down the toilet in
1983 when he liked ivan deck all those
years before declared these Hitler
Diaries that had been found authentic
later they were found to be a forgery so
his reputation got a little mud on it
and some thought this lack of judgment
might also reflect on the credibility of
his Backhouse biography Derrick's and
house calls hermit of Peking credible
but he parted ways with trevor-roper on
several points one of the main ones
involved how the Hermit of Peking author
didn't bother to try and obtain evidence
from Mantua Chinese sources who knew of
becca's he seemed to have made up his
mind about Backhouse as the fraud and
scoundrel Derek's aunt house is a little
more open-minded about baghouse the
person and even though it probably never
happened it's not as outraged as a story
as you think the possibility that back
house may have had a sexual relationship
with sushi Backhouse in his foreword to
the reader opens decadence mouth shoe
this way i sir edmund Trelawny Backhouse
a baronet of the United Kingdom do
hereby pass
of Leah firm on my honor and on that of
my respectable family which has played a
not negligible part in English public
life that the studies which I have
endeavoured to write for dr. her plea
contain nothing but the truth the whole
truth and the absolute truth nothing has
been added to embellish the facts but
dates owing to the loss of my records
cannot always be accurately given my
intercourse with sushi started in 1902
and continued till her death I had kept
an unusually close record of my secret
association with the Empress and with
others possessing notes and messages
written to me by Her Majesty but had the
misfortune to lose all these manuscripts
and papers there are two relating
largely through the cowardice of my
domestics and the treachery of people in
whom I trusted so that my large
collection of books and documents were
lost in toto that is accepting for a few
dictionaries and handbooks of a
linguistic nature which however contain
no notes on the secret not to say erotic
matters we're of i have written unquote
here bear-cows rights of the death of
the guangxu emperor quote the Emperor
was reclining on the Cong reading the
novel chin p'ing Mei electric light had
for some time been installed in the lake
palaces Shui said quote your majesty we
are respectfully conveying to you our
congratulations we have a decree from
the Empress Dowager please go on your
knees to receive it here guang shoes
faithful body servant the eunuch Jewish
Oh interposed quote the Emperor shall
not kneel to a piece of paper let her
Majesty come herself at a reasonable
hour of the day sway answered quote our
business will not wait either leave us
alone here or prepare for the inevitable
our jus moves slightly to shield the
Emperor and the eunuch mouth shot him
dead why the centuries did not intervene
was due to orders then its way read out
the vermilion decree adding Your Majesty
had best shankill meaning hang himself
we have a silken rope with us and we'll
give you a loyal send off to heaven
never said gwangsu I always knew the
verse meant to have my life my reign has
been one long agony I only asked who was
my successor Luanne Bates i replied say
you shall inform the Empress of my last
wish let her put your insurer Kai to
death he betrayed me and will betray my
successor as well as the Empress herself
sooner or later then the two murderers
tray mall and the compares press the
resisting but feeble and Brewer down on
the Cong according to sway his own
account to me which differed slightly
from lili awnings narrative partially
strangled him with the slipknot then
suffocated him slowly with pillows and
according to this excerpt from decadence
monshou that was that for the poor old
gwangsu emperor and no truer words were
ever spoken by him than what he said my
reign has been one long agony as for the
death of the Empress Dowager sushi this
is how Backhouse described her violent
end you ain't sure Chi and Qi Liang
asked her Majesty to grant them a
special private audience to submit their
humble views on a matter of State the
Empress graciously exceeded and they
knelt before her un coated thrice and
tia followed his example Your Majesty is
full of years riches and honors you pass
your remaining years and the profound
seclusion of ye houyan and not to be
troubled by multitudinous state affairs
I ask your Majesty and Tia Leon who
nodded assent joins me in prayer to give
one more decree announcing your
irrevocable abdication and appointing us
as grand Imperial preceptors who will
advise the new emperor on all government
business as joint Regents the old
Buddha's wrath kindled even as thunder
she shouted in her rage and fury you
traitor nay you traitors after all I
have done for you is this the way you
repay my benevolence I dismiss you both
from your offices and shall order that
you be handed for trial to the minister
of justice though you die a thousand
deaths your retribution will be to light
the cup of your treason and iniquity is
full to the brim leave the presence and
await my orders on Sean
who was in the side hall and tell young
who was kneeling before the throne agree
in saying that yen thereupon drew out a
six chambered revolver and fired three
shots at the Empress she did not
collapse on the instant but shouted
treason arrest urine and decapitate him
a natural villain why have i speared him
so long so not all decadence man shoe is
graphic obscenity parts of it make great
reading the writing style is a real trip
and back house sprinkles Latin French
and Chinese everywhere throughout the
book if you're interested you could get
it on Amazon sterling seagrave and his
biography on sushi dragon lady the life
and legend of the last Empress of China
published in 1992 said of backhouse
quote whatever his quirks or
perversities Edmond was a born
storyteller who found his met ta
unexpectedly in Imperial China on the
eve of revolution slyly mingling
pornography and journalism like a
child's during night soil for fertilizer
throughout his life he seemed to
experience exquisite satisfaction in
relating mischievous tales of Sue she's
feminine perversity to anyone who would
listen in his days and Peking he would
embroider upon a scandalous tidbit
picked up from the Ming shirt and gloat
the rumour with Morrison and others the
gossip would percolate through the
legations gaining widespread acceptance
Edmund would then corroborate and
enlarge upon his rumour with the
discovery of new quote facts he became
fascinated by the Chinese tradition of
secret pornographic histories and
biographies and began collecting them to
stir into his repertoire as he became
more proficient with Chinese materials
he produced phony quote official
documentation Diaries and memorials
critiqued his own counterfeit sources
pointed out the flaws and other theories
and led his credulous audience to the
inescapable conclusion that only
Backhouse was correct unquote as for
backhouses memoir decadence monshou
seagrave sums it up this way quote the
extravagance of this want and sexual
burlesque with the Dowager and the group
task details of their encounters make it
painfully apparent that they are
inflamed sexual fantasy of a mind
completely unhinged what began many
decades earlier is ingenious mischievous
satire disguised as history now
degenerated into a lunatic graffiti
unquote yung-chun or John wrong the
author of Wild Swans and a highly
critical biography of Mao wrote about
back house in her recent book and
procedure sushi the concubine who
launched modern China unlike sterling
seagraves sushi by Oh John wrong hardly
mentions back house at all he merely got
a mention in a footnote where John wrong
wrote quote back house has since been
exposed as a literary forger in this
case what he seems to have done was to
fake five passages about sushi and
insert them into a well-known published
diary by a Beijing official named who
could do as Backhouse published his
biography first in English the five
false passages melt into the english
translation of the diary he quoted when
his book was then translated into
chinese the forged passages thus
laundered became part of the diary the
fake has puzzled historians as the
additions of the diary that exists in
China contained no such references to
the solution over the years a lot of you
have requested she is a CHP topic and I
assure you when I made the initial list
back in 2010 she was one of the first
names I wrote down we'll get to her one
of these days you sure got an earful in
today's episode didn't you and with that
we'll end our little three-part overview
of the life of Sir Edmund back house
again the books I invite you to read our
the Hermit of Peking by hugh
trevor-roper and decadence monshou
edited by dereks and house as you know
this year 2014 marks a hundred years
since the start World War one I wanted
to let you know about a new podcast that
I found particularly good check out Tom
takin's world war one podcast called the
first world war in 261 weeks the podcast
will feature a story per week
reducing all the characters from this
period 261 weeks that's the amount of
time between Sarajevo and Versailles so
go check that out wherever fine history
podcasts are distributed or at the
website www the first world war in 261
weeks com also I'd like to let you know
about author Susan Barker's new book if
you're like me and you can't get enough
historical fiction in your life her new
one is called the incarnations and it's
published by Doubleday it's a modern-day
story that weaves in and out of a
thousand years of Chinese history I
haven't read it yet but it's near the
top of my cue right now I'm reading an
earlier work of Susan Barker's called
the orientalist and the ghost very
enjoyable the incarnations you might
have heard the book recommended on
Seneca recently during the sin and Vice
episode with Robert foil Hunwick I'm
going to be taking some time off to work
on the next series so it may be a month
or so before we meet again if you're
desperate for news and updates you can
always follow me on the China history
podcast Facebook page this is laszlo
Montgomery signing off from sunny and
beautiful claremont california on the
outer edges of LA County take care
everyone and I hope your summers going
fantastic join me next time won't you
for another exciting episode of the
China history podcast